---
title: "Applying for a grant: first time"
date: 2020-10-02T09:00:00.000Z
description: "I applied for a Nokia Scholarship this autumn. It was not accepted."
imageUrl:
---

My advisors encouraged me to seek this [grant](https://nokiafoundation.com/grants/nokia-scholarship/) from Nokia.
In the end, I did not receive the grant, but I figured this post could still be useful to someone sometime. The grant would finance my dissertation project and I would have used it mostly for conference travel.

**The application process** itself was fairly pleasant. They have an online form with multiple pages, which you could fill out in any order with saves in between. I worked on mine bit by bit for about two weeks (total working time about a day, max).

The main steps were:
- Personal information
- Description of research area
- My dissertation project schedule/plan
- Financial matters; what the grant would be used for
- Attachments (CV, studies completed, diplomas)
- Supervisor statements

For the research description, I wrote a bit over 400 words, and 250 for thesis schedule with plans for each year until 2023. On the financial plan I was concise and to the point. The attachments required making up to date versions, which took some effort, but ought to be usable generally as well.

The supervisor statements I am grateful for. We had a meeting about my current research and progress, and refined the research plan for the future as well. My supervisors then had a fresh understanding to base their statements on.


**What makes a good application?** I would not say I am qualified to answer as the more seasoned academics have thousand times my experience. So with a spoonful of salt:

1. *Have a narrative* in the application. While in practice the future is uncertain, it makes the application confident to present clear steps for the entire project.
2. *Sell your research* in the context of the field and in terms someone not specialized will appreciate.
3. *Strong supervisor statements*, from persons with reputation. While I don't know the exact text both my supervisors sent, from our exchanges I know they will strongly recommend me to the foundation. I would assume this is the most important step.

**Lessons were learnt** during the entire process. I can feel for those who have to write grant applications as their day job, but in this occasional way it was useful. The effort was not a waste at all, even if I did not win the scholarship. The application "forced" me to articulate my research plan for the thesis in a more structured way, and clarified the schedule for both the dissertation and postgraduate studies.

What I could have done to win the scholarship? In terms of what I think makes a good application, I am sure the number 3 was not the issue.
So that leaves 1. and 2. and perhaps "random chance". I do not like attributing things to random chance, so the lesson must be to write better. I discussed the application text with others for feedback. While the feedback was positive, our English lecturer from a course I'm taking mentioned some ways to improve my writing. The language in grant applications is different from the language in academic papers, and I believe my text was too boring for a general reader, failing point 2 from above. Next time, I'll keep in mind that grant applications are not written for a reader specialized in my field.
